From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> Just hours before a federal immigration
officer killed Renee Good in her car,
>> [music]
>> the Minneapolis police chief warned that
a tragedy involving ICE
>> [music]
>> and the people of his city seemed
inevitable.
Today,
>> [music]
>> I speak with that police chief, Brian
O'Hara, about his experience [music]
with ICE in Minneapolis
and why, in his mind, the president's
campaign of mass deportation is
undermining faith in police departments
like his.
It's Monday, January 12th.
Chief O'Hara, thank you for making time
for us on
>> Sure. a Sunday no less and a very busy
weekend for you. Sure, thank you for
having me.
The past 48 hours
were pretty extraordinary
from the perspective of an outsider.
There were these enormous protests. I
believe you yourself ended up in the
middle of one of them. I've tried to
make sense of the video. It I mean, what
has this been like for you? So, what
happened was we had a protest start
outside of a hotel where people believe
federal law enforcement might be
staying.
They they believed ICE agents were
staying there, right?
>> Right, exactly. During the course of
that protest in March, it it sort of
transitioned into an unlawful assembly
and things that typically happen in
cities happen and a woman who was
disoriented drove her car onto a
sidewalk and the police were called to
respond. So, while the police car was
there dealing with regular police work,
uh suddenly they realized they had
become surrounded by this crowd, which
had become unruly. So, our officers uh
called in uh that they were unable to
drive out
and I was in the area personally with
other police officers. We just we
quickly ran in to back the crowd out to
get a path for the police car to come
out. And I think because [music] we did
that, I think that may have contributed
to emboldening an already unruly crowd
and we very quickly called in well over
200 additional police officers and then
ultimately, we wound up placing uh 30
people under arrest for unlawful
assembly and releasing them.
It's been very taxing for all members of
the police department and this is a
situation that has been building up for
several weeks.
A lot of the disturbances and chaos
that's been happening here as a result
of the manner in which some federal
enforcement activity is happening
is requiring our officers to respond and
step into situations and try and restore
the peace, where oftentimes they
themselves then
become the target of people's
frustration.
Well, you're hinting at all this. The
reason we're talking to you, of course,
is because of the fact that ICE is
there, but because specifically of what
an ICE agent did in the middle of last
week, the shooting of a Minneapolis
resident, Renee Good. A shooting that
killed Ms. Good and at this point,
millions of people have watched the
video of that shooting from every
conceivable angle on social media, on TV
news,
but there was a lead-up to that shooting
that a lot of us didn't watch as closely
and and didn't see on TV or on YouTube
and that was the arrival of a large
number of Immigration and Customs
Enforcement agents starting in early
December. And so, that's where I want to
begin.
Take me back to that period for you as
police chief. What was your
understanding of why the president
decided to send these agents to your
city?
About a month ago in December, it seemed
like the public messaging was largely
political and and it was a result of a
real problem that does exist in the
state and that is a problem with fraud.
Uh dozens of people have been prosecuted
uh by the FBI and the US Attorney's
Office here in Minnesota. You're
referring to the fraud that had been
specifically highlighted in the Somali
community in Minneapolis. And I I do
want to talk about the president's
message when he decided to send
specifically immigration officers to
Minneapolis. I mean, he was pretty
explicit about his thinking. In his
mind,
the Somali population in the city, which
is sizable and well-known, Yes. he
described it as a community that was
sowing disorder, committing crimes.
Basically, in so many words, a community
of troublemakers who should be
deported. And I wonder what you made of
that and if it felt like that had been
your experience as chief.
Well, I'm from about 10 miles from lower
Manhattan is where I grew up. I was a
police officer for over 20 years in
Newark, New Jersey, but I had not known
any Somali Americans until I moved to
Minnesota
and the Somali Americans that I have met
here, including many of whom are police
officers uh
in this city,
have been incredibly welcoming of me. Uh
you know, so from a personal
perspective,
it was just bizarre because I'm also
aware that the overwhelming majority of
people from that community
are American citizens.
Well, from from a crime perspective, was
anything the president was saying true?
>> [snorts]
>> Well, there is a real problem with fraud
in the state and unfortunately, that is
sort of lost now
in all of this political rhetoric and
sort of the extreme reactions that
occur. You're you're drawing a
distinction between fraud and kind of
traditional street crime.
>> Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But you're
acknowledging that there's some level of
fraud occurring perhaps in this
community. Perhaps that's what the
president is
referring to. In your mind, that's
distinct from perhaps the crime that you
you and your officers are dealing with
day in and day out. Yes, absolutely.
Those cases
that were brought about uh leading to
dozens and dozens of of prosecutions
were led by the US Attorney's Office
here in Minnesota as well as the FBI.
Got it. So, in your mind, was this plan
deployment, specifically of ICE agents
that the president asked for, was it
warranted?
>> [sighs]
>> I mean, there have been immigration
enforcement conducted in Minnesota
as long as there has been ICE.
I think the problem is what gets lost in
this
is it's not necessarily about which laws
are being enforced, it's about how that
enforcement is happening. To the extent
that there are
well-planned, pre-planned,
targeted
enforcement against people who who are
violating the law,
I think all of law enforcement can very
clearly get behind that.
But to the extent that
things are being conducted that may not
be well-planned, using [snorts]
tactics that generally are not viewed as
sound,
that may unnecessarily endanger the
lives both of law enforcement officers
conducting that enforcement
as well as the lives of people in the
community,
certainly those are concerns
that I have to deal with and I am
responsible for as a professional
managing my agency. Mhm. So, it sounds
like for you, it's not the fact of ICE
coming that is the issue. It's the way
that that that ICE came. So, so let's
talk about that. So,
the president makes his case that
immigration enforcement should be
happening on a larger scale in
Minneapolis and in early December, he
makes it happen. How did the operations
of these ICE agents
work and how did it start to affect the
police department that you run? What
changed? I mean, you're hinting that
their tactics are different. Yes.
So, we've just gotten a
pretty dramatic increase
in 911 calls from people in the
community related to a lot of the street
enforcement that's happening.
And I mean, it's everything from people
are being arrested and their cars are
left in the roadway, sometimes blocking
the street. In one case, left what it
wasn't even placed in park and was
rolling down the road. Wait, wait, so I
so ICE officials are are are taking
someone out of their car, arresting them
and their car is not even put in park?
We had that happen. We had another time
where there was a dog in the car and
they left the dog in the car. Wow. I
mean, even this morning, we've gotten
calls for individuals who were pepper
sprayed by ICE. It's just a variety of
calls for service that we then have to
manage and triage that were not
happening before. And how does that
sudden influx of 911 calls because
people are experiencing ICE tactics
affect the department as a whole? How
does it complicate your policing? It
complicates things because we remain
significantly understaffed. This is the
Minneapolis Police Department.
>> [snorts]
>> The majority of the cops that worked
here in 2020, 5 years later, the
majority have left and we're trying to
rebuild. We remain 1/3 below what had
been typical of of staffing for the
police department here today? Well,
we're dealing with a much higher level
of serious street crime than what had
been normal in the past. So, this is
adding additional work.
Probably the toughest distinction is
we're getting called and pulled into
situations
that are very tense and very emotionally
charged.
>> [snorts]
>> And oftentimes we're asked to try and
step in and de-escalate situations where
federal law enforcement may have been
involved that very very quickly, as soon
as we show up, we become the target of
people's frustration. Mhm. So, the
minute you show up The minute we show
up, we're the problem. You know, people
are ready to go.
It could very very quickly explode.
And with the level of staffing that we
have and the time that it takes to get
the National Guard to come in, it will
be too late. That's my fear.
I mean,
you've been talking around this and I
think we should just make this extremely
explicit that
you come to the job of being police
chief in Minneapolis
at a very specific moment with a very
specific
mandate. You arrive just 2 years after a
Minneapolis police officer murdered
George Floyd at a moment of extremely
low morale for the department and really
high levels of distrust of the police
department by the community. And when
you took this job, I went back and
looked at the old clips, you called
Minneapolis ground zero for a global
reckoning on policing and you in the job
put in place sweeping reforms to try to
rebuild trust, repair relationships
between police and residents. Just give
us a couple examples of the reforms you
put in place and that presumably are now
being somewhat challenged by ICE's
presence.
So, we have placed a very strong
emphasis on use of force, on employing
de-escalation,
on the use of critical decision-making
practices.
We have gone out and had dozens of
community meetings to get input from
community as we revise our policies. And
I think it it all boils down to
trying to fight crime in a way that
earns community trust as opposed to
alienating people. And from what you're
saying, suddenly, as of a few weeks ago,
all of that work
is confronted with an outside group of
federal law enforcement officials
arriving in your city, doing police
work,
but who don't answer to you and are not
as inevitably invested in the reform
efforts that you have put in place. They
have a totally different mandate and it
sounds like you're saying all of a
sudden that is just immediately
overshadowing, challenging, complicating
this entire project that you have
overtaken as police chief. Absolutely.
And in the midst of
all of those challenges, while we're
trying to heal this community, while
we're trying to heal the men and women
who have remained here and rebuild,
while they're already the most
scrutinized police department in the
nation.
>> [snorts]
>> And and I can tell you like the cops
here, we're human beings. And as I worry
that we might hit a breaking point.
It feels like as the weeks went on here
that residents are taking it upon
themselves to monitor ICE agents and
their activity.
Minneapolis, this is not a secret,
pretty liberal city and there are
residents who organized themselves in
this period into groups. They're
shadowing ICE agents, they're texting
each other, they're blowing whistles.
And it's amounting to a pretty
meaningful effort to counter their
enforcement operations. I don't know if
you quibble with that word. Does that
become its own problem and did you find
yourself wishing that the residents were
not doing that? Did you try to
discourage it?
Well, I can tell you the role of the
police and law enforcement in the United
States
is first off to protect life, but it's
also to ensure people's human rights and
their constitutional rights.
And people in this country have a First
Amendment right to observe, record, and
object to government activity.
And that includes the activity that
Minneapolis police officers do as well
as other law enforcement in our city.
And [snorts] so, it is a challenge, but
it's a challenge that policing in
America has been dealing with and and
trying to improve upon uh for many
years. It does add a level of
complication to our work. But I just
want to be clear though,
I'm not asking for federal law
enforcement to do anything differently
than what I expect the men and women of
the Minneapolis Police Department to do.
What you're describing clearly sounds
like a pretty combustible combination.
You've got ICE agents who are operating
with their own
systems and set of rules
and then you have these residents in
your words operating their First
Amendment right to
surround them, to monitor them, to
scream at them. And this is adding up to
clearly Yes.
>> a very delicate situation. And there's a
moment that I want to ask you about
because it felt
oddly prescient where within the last
week or so, you stand up at a news
conference and you say basically, I am
worried.
I I do have an ask that's both for
federal law enforcement You say may not
be from
>> ICE agents, you have your job to do, but
please do it lawfully. Um and then at
the same time to members of the
community Residents, yes, you can have
your protest, please do it peacefully.
I've been concerned for weeks that
because the issue is so emotional and
because frankly some of the way this
stuff has been carried out, the greatest
risk to me is that there would be unrest
or that there would be a tragedy.
That somebody could get seriously hurt
or killed.
But you seem to kind of know
that something awful was coming. Yes.
I mean, this was predictable.
And it's also entirely preventable.
I had been saying it for weeks.
I literally said it at a press
conference the day before. And and when
you found out that it was true, that
there was a shooting involving an ICE
agent, what was your
first thought?
I mean,
I'm having a hard time describing it.
I I just thought
[__] this is it.
You know, this is the potential here for
2020 all over again.
For George Floyd all over again.
For the destruction of the city.
We'll be right back.
So, I understand that an investigation
is still underway of what happened in
this shooting and we don't know exactly
what that investigation is going to look
like or what it's going to conclude and
we'll talk in just a few moments about
the conflict arising from the
investigation over whose investigation
it should be.
But just to focus for a minute on the
shooting itself,
have you watched the videos?
Yes, I've seen the videos that are
available online. What is your
understanding of how this unfolded?
>> [music]
>> My understanding is that there was a
woman who was in her car and was
blocking the street
likely because immigration agents were
present uh and she was likely protesting
in some way immigration officials being
present.
And ultimately some confrontation
occurred
uh
where federal law enforcement shot into
the vehicle
KILLING HER.
HAVING WATCHED THE VIDEOS AND spoken
perhaps to responding officers, does
this strike you as a lawful interaction
between the ICE officer and the
resident?
Well, [snorts] I can tell you as a
police officer for 25 years, anytime you
hear a situation where a cop gets into a
shooting
with an unarmed motorist, it gives you
pause and it's very concerning because
while
policies and training try to everything
possible to prohibit those situations
and to try and prevent them from
occurring in the first place,
there are times, unfortunately,
where law enforcement cannot avoid those
situations from occurring. The concern
is, as a professional,
to try and prevent our people from
getting into that situation in the first
place, so that we're not unnecessarily
creating the risk
unjustifiably.
Well, let's talk about that. You You
mentioned training. My sense is that
there are some pretty universal rules
around policing when it comes to a
motorist in a running car. The number
one is you don't place yourself in the
path of the vehicle.
That's like traffic stop 101. You don't
do that.
So, in your mind, that's a flag that you
have this ICE agent, the one who ends up
shooting Renee Good, standing in front
of her car. Absolutely.
And then the other one is what exactly
is the mission here?
Because if this person
isn't the target of a pre-planned
enforcement action,
then what are we doing?
Are we trying to de-escalate and try and
resolve the situation? Are we trying to
take an enforcement action and enforce
some law here, or what exactly is is the
goal?
We're focusing here on the ICE officers.
I do want to ask you about the driver's
decision-making Mhm. in this moment. Her
refusal to get out of the car, even
after ICE agents demand that she get out
of the car,
her reversing then driving forward.
She appears to disobey spoken orders
from from these officers.
As somebody who thinks about this stuff,
let's just ask this really plainly, was
she in the wrong?
Well, I can only speak to conducting the
traffic stop from my perspective as a
police officer. What is our policy? What
is our training? Number one, you
approach the driver, you introduce
yourself by rank, by name, by what
agency you work for, and you tell the
person, explain why the person is being
stopped. You [snorts] do these sorts of
things to try and ensure one number one
to identify yourself, but to try and
ensure
a level of professionalism and to try
and de-escalate.
If the person asks you a question that's
reasonable, you respond to it
reasonably. That That is the
expectation.
And did the ICE agent do any of that? My
recollection is that there was not
>> and further,
it just seems like there's confusion,
and I I don't know, just from what I
recall, but it seems like someone else
is saying to get out of the car than the
officer who shot, and I just it's not
clear to me whether
the two of them were working together
and understood what each other was
trying to accomplish.
Do you feel that this would have ended
differently had this been handled
entirely by the MPD, not ICE? No
question.
Do you have any empathy for the ICE
officer,
given the split-second
nature of of policing, putting aside
whether he should have ever been in
front of the car? Yes, absolutely.
>> [snorts]
>> Law enforcement leaders, executives,
have an obligation to their people.
We have an obligation to ensure that our
people have sufficient policy,
sufficient training, sufficient
experiences
for the challenges that we are placing
them into. We have an obligation not to
send our people out there and to tell
them,
you know, you have a specific quota
today. You have to get a certain number
of people. I mean, it seems like that's
the situation these folks are being
placed into.
And that went out the window a long time
ago in professional policing. And
considering this agent was seriously
injured in a stop, you know, somewhat
recently,
it certainly raises questions as to what
did the agency do to protect their
person?
You're You're referring to the fact that
that I believe this officer, and the
Times has written about it, was involved
in a stop where he was dragged in a car.
Yes. He sustained significant bodily
injury, for sure.
So, what did the agency do to ensure
that that officer would not be unsafe in
similar situations? Right. I mean,
you're basically raising questions about
whether ICE agents are sufficiently
trained to handle these kinds of
encounters. Yes, and whether or not Do
you think they are? I don't have
specific information about that. I just
know what I've read. I know what's been
reported. It's been reported
that they're not even getting the level
of training that they used to get, that
the the time of training is less. I
think that's concerning, and I do think
they are being forced into situations in
which they are not well prepared to deal
with.
Let me turn to the investigation. And I
want to ask you about two issues that
have arisen with this investigation. The
first, of course, is that the federal
government has blocked local officials
from participating in the investigation,
and they basically argue
that because of comments made by your
boss, Mayor Jacob Frey, that local
officials can't be objective. On the
other hand, you've got the Trump
administration out there basically
saying,
you know, Renee Good is entirely at
fault, and the ICE officer did nothing
wrong here. So, can they be objective? I
mean, how are you making sense of what
has become an incredibly messy and
contentious situation over what I
normally think of as everybody doing
joint investigations of of a tragic
situation.
Well, I think the loss here is the loss
of any
trust that the investigation would be
legitimate. Mhm. And I'll tell you, I
know a lot of the FBI agents here, and
I believe the FBI will still do a
thorough investigation, cuz that's what
they do. That's what the people who
staff this agency here, that's what they
do every day.
But will Minneapolis residents believe
that it's a serious investigation? But
that's the problem. The way this has
played out has taken all sense of
legitimacy away from many people, and
that's very unfortunate.
I want to talk about what happens next
now in the city as this investigation,
for which there may not be much faith
locally, unfolds. Because in the wake of
this shooting and these protests, your
governor has dispatched the National
Guard to Minneapolis. The president is
dispatching or plans to dispatch
far more federal officials, Border
Patrol agents. Is that just going to
magnify all the challenges that we have
been talking about here?
>> [snorts]
>> Well, I had asked the mayor to have the
National Guard on standby as this was
initially unfolding because it was so
unpredictable.
I was afraid that
once it came to the point
where we might need the National Guard,
it it would probably take too long to
get them here. So, that's why I'm glad
they were on standby. Going forward,
it's my understanding that there is
additional federal law enforcement being
added to the state
specifically to conduct more of these
operations.
That is concerning.
If this escalates, are you worried,
Chief Arradondo, that all of this is
just going to erase the work you've done
over the past four-plus years to rebuild
and repair the community's trust in the
Minneapolis Police Department?
The number one priority
that I worry about
in terms of erasing work that we've done
>> [snorts]
>> is ultimately erasing the gains that
we've made rebuilding the department
and being able to reduce crime. Mhm. You
know, in June of 2020, immediately after
the destruction of the city, the burning
of a police station here,
in that one month, we had about as many
shootings in one month as the city used
to have in half a year. Mhm. And that
level of crime stayed very high, and,
you know, now the last couple of years
has started to come down.
And it's come down despite not having
enough officers. And we finally have
started
to rebuild, and I'm just afraid if we
have another large-scale unrest that we
are go both going to have a dramatic
increase in crime yet again, that's
predictable, as well as another mass
exodus of the department.
And we just we we cannot sustain that.
I mean,
is there any part of you that feels that
this moment could strengthen the
relationship between the community and
police and test this work
and reveal that you all have made
progress, that people will see a
distinction between the MPD and the
feds? I know that is true. I've had many
people reach out and activists reach
out, uh, our elected officials, many
people who typically have nothing good
to say about the Minneapolis Police
>> [snorts]
>> have been incredibly complimentary of
how well, how restrained, how
disciplined the Minneapolis police
officers have been in these very, very
tense situations over the last several
days. Mhm. But it's not universal. You
know, there's people here who,
despite what's happening,
seem to think it's our job to do ICE's
job. There's people here to seem to
think that
that we should continue to make the same
failed mistakes of the past when dealing
with protests and crowd control and not
utilize the best practices to
de-escalate
and to keep everyone safe.
Are we fully there yet? Of course not.
We're not We haven't accomplished
winning trust with all levels of the
community. That was obvious this week
with all the the hate and vitriol that
was directed towards our officers.
But there's certainly been progress.
Just to end this conversation, Chief
Arradondo, how do you think you get back
to a simpler time in your policing where
you can be focused on the reforms that
you brought to the city,
on repairing relations between police
and the community, and in your mind,
does ICE, does Border Patrol, do all
these federal agents need to leave the
city for you to do that?
I mean, I think everybody wants to get
back to some sense of normalcy. And I
think that does involve
some level of returning to some basic
things that we accepted as normal. You
know, that obviously isn't federal law
enforcement stops enforcing federal law.
That's not the answer, either. But, it
does have to do with having an honest
conversation
about reality. We've had many instances
of people being stopped, family members
of police officers being stopped that
are American citizens. By ICE? Yeah,
it's definitely at best, it is
definitely questionable.
They're not stopping family members of
folks who are Norwegian or Irish.
[clears throat] That's not happening.
>> Mhm.
Just to return to that question. Can
your work at its best coexist with the
work of a organization like ICE?
>> [music]
>> We are doing it right now, and we are
proving to the world that this is
possible. That this is not the same
police department it was 5 years ago or
10 years ago or 15 years ago, but
it is an unbelievable stress on everyone
involved,
>> [music]
>> and I think everybody needs to turn the
heat down
and hopefully get some [music] sense of
normalcy, some basic things to return.
>> [music]
>> Chief Arradondo, thank you very much for
your time. We really appreciate it.
Thank you, Michael.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
As massive anti-government [music]
protests spread across Iran over the
weekend, Iran's president vowed to
address the country's economic [music]
problems, but showed no signs of backing
off a harsh crackdown on demonstrators.
That crackdown, activists say, may have
killed as many as 200 people over the
past few days. So, Iran's in big
trouble. [music] It looks to me that the
people are taking over certain cities
that nobody thought were really possible
just a few weeks ago. Meanwhile, the
Trump administration is [music] warning
Iran's leaders that it could strike Iran
if the regime continues [music] to kill
peaceful protesters.
The Times reports that US military
leaders have begun to brief President
Trump on options for such strikes. If
they start killing people like they have
in the past,
>> [music]
>> we will get involved. We'll be hitting
them very hard where it hurts.
And that doesn't mean boots on the
ground, but it means hitting them very,
very hard where it hurts. So,
And [music] the Trump administration is
escalating its long-running feud with
the chairman of the Federal Reserve,
Jerome Powell, by opening a criminal
investigation into his conduct.
>> [music]
>> The investigation centers around whether
Powell lied to Congress [music] about
the scope of a multi-billion-dollar
renovation project of the Fed's
headquarters.
But, Trump's original conflict with
Powell stems from his unwillingness to
significantly slash interest rates as
President Trump had demanded, a reality
>> [music]
>> that Powell highlighted in a video
released on Sunday night.
The threat of criminal charges is a
consequence of the Federal Reserve
setting interest rates
>> [music]
>> based on our best assessment of what
will serve the public, rather than
following the preferences of the
president. [music]
Today's episode was produced by Nina
Feldman, Lindsay Garrison, Olivia
[music] Nat, and Ricky Niyazov. It was
edited by Lexi Dio, contains research
[music] help from Susan Lee, music by
Dan Powell, Marion Lozano, and Alicia
Bedu,
>> [music]
>> and was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
Special thanks to Mitch Smith and
Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm [music] Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.